Email: j-seawright@northwestern.edu

# Basic Course Information

This course provides an introduction to the empirical methods political
scientists use to answer questions about politics, and the reasons why
such methods matter. After exploring how hard it is to make good
descriptive and causal inferences about politics, we will examine three
basic strategies for overcoming the obstacles to reliable knowledge
about the political world: experimentation, large N or quantitative
studies (AKA statistics), and small N studies that use qualitative
reasoning.

At the end of this course, you will be able to:

-   Understand and explain why descriptive and causal inference are
    difficult tasks in political science.

-   Identify possible weaknesses in academic or other descriptive and
    causal claims about politics.

-   Understand and explain the strengths and weaknesses of experimental
    research designs for causal inference about politics.

-   Understand and explain the strengths and weaknesses of survey and
    regression-based quantitative research designs for descriptive and
    causal inference about politics.

-   Understand and explain the strengths and weaknesses of qualitative
    methods for descriptive and causal inference about politics.

-   Apply all of these tools to critically evaluating examples of
    political science research.

-   Think about how empirical evidence matters to your own questions
    about politics.

Grades will be based on three homework assignments (30% total), a
midterm (30% total), a final exam (30%), and participation (10%).
Homework due dates will be set throughout the quarter. Students are
encouraged to form study groups and work together but must complete and
submit their own homework.

-   October 17th: First homework due.

-   October 21st: Take-home midterm due.

-   November 14th: Second homework due.

-   November 21th: Zoom session to support Thanksgiving travel.

-   November 21st: Third homework due.

-   Monday, December 4th, 2:00 PM: Take-home final exam due.

You are required to complete a research assignment that can include up
to 4 hours of research study participation. These studies require that
students set up an appointment to complete participation at a laboratory
on campus (or via an on-line survey). You will learn how studies are
conducted and will receive a synopsis at the conclusion of the quarter
describing the study's goal, result, and relevance to the class. If you
prefer not to participate in research as a subject, you may opt for an
alternative that entails reading one chapter about political science
research and writing a five page reaction paper. The typical chapter is
about 20 pages and thus reading it and writing a five page paper should
take approximately four hours.

During the first week of the quarter, you will receive an e-mail asking
you whether you prefer study participation or the alternative
assignment. The e-mail will also include details on how to complete
either requirement. Failure to complete the requirement during the
quarter will result in an incomplete. Failure to complete the
requirement during the following quarter will result in a failing grade
for the class. Note that if you are enrolled in multiple classes that
require participation, you only need to satisfy the requirement one
time. Also, if you already completed the requirement in another course
in a previous quarter, you are excused from the requirement.

While some of the tools discussed in this course are based in
sophisticated mathematical reasoning, our discussion of them will be
posed at a primarily conceptual level. Hence, no particular mathematical
or statistical background is expected for this course.

One choice for the textbook for this course is *The Fundamentals of
Political Science Research*, 3rd edition, written by Paul M. Kellstedt
and Guy D. Whitten. A second option, available online, is *Empirical
Methods in Political Science: An introduction*, edited by Jean
Clipperton. That text can be found at [the library's
github](https://nulib-oer.github.io/empirical-methods-polisci/). These
textbooks will be supplemented as needed with other readings available
electronically, either linked in this syllabus or found in the Readings
folder of the course Canvas site. You are free to read these materials
either before or after class, as works best for your study process,
unless we ask you otherwise in special preparation for a particular
class session.

Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30 to 10:50

Block Pick-Laudati Auditorium

Tuesday, 3-5

# Academic Integrity

Suspected violations of academic integrity will be reported to the
Dean's Office. For more information on Northwestern's academic integrity
policies, see
<http://www.weinberg.northwestern.edu/undergraduate/courses-registration-grades/integrity/>.
All student work in this class may be analyzed electronically for
violations of the University's academic integrity policy and may also be
included in a database for the purpose of testing for plagiarized
content.

# Note

Any student requesting accommodations related to a disability or other
condition is required to register with AccessibleNU
(accessiblenu@northwestern.edu; 847-467-5530) and provide professors
with an accommodation notification from AccessibleNU, preferably within
the first two weeks of class. All information will remain confidential.

# Course Schedule and Readings

This schedule is subject to changes (minor or major) depending on how
long each topic actually takes us to cover, as well as on the needs of
the class.

Sept. 19: *Introduction, conceptualization and measurement.*

Kellstedt and Whitten, Chapters 1 and 2.

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 1.

Sept. 21: *Describing data.*

Kellstedt and Whitten, Chapter 5.

Recommended: [Jason Cohen, "Avoiding common data-interpretation errors."
A Smart
Bear](https://blog.asmartbear.com/data-interpretation-mistakes.html)

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 4.

Sept. 26: *Criteria for causality.*

Kellstedt and Whitten, Chapters 3 and 4.

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 2.

Sept. 28: *Causal inference.*

[David A. Freedman. "Statistical Models and Shoe Leather," Sociological
Methodology 21 (1991):
291-313.](https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/270939.pdf)

Oct. 3: *Sampling and survey research.*

Kellstedt and Whitten, Chapter 6.

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 6.

Oct. 5: *Writing survey questions.*

Floyd J. Fowler, Jr. *Improving Survey Questions: Design and
Evaluation*, (Thousand Oaks: Sage), pp. 1-6 AND 78-103.

"Survey Questions 101: Do You Make any of These 7 Question Writing
Mistakes?" http://www.qualtrics.com/blog/writing-survey-questions/

Oct. 10: *Experimentation.*

Kellstedt and Whitten, Chapter 7.

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 7.

Oct. 12: *Political science experiments.*

[Wladimir G. Gramacho and Mathieu Turgeon, "When politics collides with
public health: COVID-19 vaccine country of origin and vaccination
acceptance in Brazil," Vaccine 39 (2021):
2608-12.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.03.080)

Recommended: [BOS, L., SCHEMER, C., CORBU, N., HAMELEERS, M., ANDREADIS,
I., SCHULZ, A., SCHMUCK, D., REINEMANN, C. and FAWZI, N. (2020), The
effects of populism as a social identity frame on persuasion and
mobilisation: Evidence from a 15-country experiment. European Journal of
Political Research, 59: 3-24.](https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12334)

Oct. 17: *Analyzing experimental data.*

No reading for this session.

Oct. 19: *Class session skipped to provide time for midterm.*

No reading for this session.

Oct. 24: *Confidence intervals and significance tests I.*

Freedman, Pisani, and Purves Chapters 5, 20, and 21.

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 5.

Oct. 26: *Confidence intervals and significance tests II.*

Freedman, Pisani, and Purves Chapters 26, 27, and 29.

Oct. 31: *Correlation and regression.*

Kellstedt and Whitten, Chapter 8.

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 8.

Recommended: Kellstedt and Whitten, Chapter 9.

Recommended: John DiNardo, "Interesting Questions in Freakonomics."
http://www-personal.umich.edu/Â jdinardo/Freak/revisionfinale.pdf

Nov. 2: *Quantitative political science research examples.*

[Kirk Bansak, Jens Hainmueller, and Dominik Hangartner, "How economic,
humanitarian, and religious concerns shape European attitudes toward
asylum seekers."
Science](http://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2016/09/22/science.aag2147).

Recommended: [Ryan D. Enos. "What the Demolition of Public Housing
Teaches Us about the Impact of Racial Threat on Political Behavior."
American Journal of Political Science 60 (January 2016):
123--142.](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ajps.12156)

Nov. 7: *Text methods and AI in social science.*

[Erin L. Rossiter, "Measuring Agenda Setting in Interactive Political
Communication." American Journal of Political Science 66 (April 2022):
337-51.](https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12653)

Nov. 9: *The qualitative comparative method.*

[David Collier, "Understanding Process Tracing." PS: Political Science
and Politics 44 (Oct. 2011):
823-30.](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/ps-political-science-and-politics/article/understanding-process-tracing/183A057AD6A36783E678CB37440346D1)

Optional: Clipperton, ed., Chapter 9.

Nov. 14: *Qualitative political science research examples.*

[Edward L. Gibson, "Boundary Control: Subnational Authoritarianism in
Democratic Countries," World Politics 58 (Oct. 2005):
101-132.](https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/wpot58&div=9&g_sent=1&casa_token=&collection=journals)

[Chloe N. Thurston, "Policy Feedback in the Public--Private Welfare
State: Advocacy Groups and Access to Government Homeownership Programs,
1934--1954," Studies in American Political Development 29 (Oct. 2015):
250-67.](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0898588X15000097)

Nov. 16: *Ethics and Normative Concerns in Political Science.*

Ron Iphofen, *Ethical Decision-Making in Social Research: A Practical
Guide*. 2009. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Chapter 1.

Recommended: [Arthur Lupia and Colin Elman, "Openness in Political
Science: Data Access and Research Transparency," PS: Political Science &
Politics 47 (Jan. 2014):
19-42.](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/ps-political-science-and-politics/article/openness-in-political-science-data-access-and-research-transparency/0B189FC1097A4D062E57F805E8F07BD0)

Nov. 21: *Summary, review, and looking forward.*

[Joe Soss, Meghan Condon, Matthew Holleque, and Amber Wichowsky. 2006.
"The Illusion of Technique: How MethodâDriven Research Leads Welfare
Scholarship Astray." *Social Science Quarterly* 87 (Dec.):
798-807.](https://www.jstor.org/stable/42956158)
